The next analysis procedure that I will introduce you to is called a state space analysis.
And I think it's a nice integration of path length token embeddings, vectors, and also principal components
analysis and dimension reduction.
If you are already comfortable with PCA, then state space trajectories are actually really straightforward.
It's literally just projecting the vectors down onto two or maybe three principal components, and then
quantifying the progression of the data through the PCA space.
So this is a screenshot from the video where I introduced principal components analysis.
And remember that the idea of a PCA is to find an orthogonal set of basis vectors such that each vector
explains as much variability in the data as possible, while being orthogonal to all of the previous
vectors.
Now, we have previously used this analysis to look at the effective dimensionality of the embeddings,
vectors, and spaces, and that was all based on the singular values.
What we are going to do here, and also in the code challenge coming up after the next video, is to
use these basis vectors to compress the data down from the 1000 dimensional embedding space down to
two dimensions, corresponding to the first two principal components.
So here's what I will show you in the Python demo in a moment.
I'll start by importing the GPT two medium model and then tokenizing a bunch of texts, a bunch of sentences.
Now, you have seen this data set of 54 sentences that contain all the words her once in each sentence.
And what you're looking at here is a variant of that data set where I replaced the word her with the
word him.
So now I have 54 sentences with him, 54 of the exact same sentences with the target word her.
And then for an interesting comparison, I've also replaced the word him with the word round.
Now, this is an interesting comparison case because her and him are pronouns, they are grammatically
correct in those sentences that I just showed.
They are also sensible in these sentences.
However, round is not a pronoun.
It's not even a noun, it's an adjective.
And so it's grammatically incorrect in all of these sentences.
For example, we invited round to dinner.
That just doesn't make any sense.
So now we have three groups of sentences, all of which are identical.
So the three data sets are identical except for this one target word.
And two of those data sets.
Two of those groups have the same part of speech.
So a pronoun.
And then here we have something that just doesn't make any sense grammatically.
Anyway, I am going to push all of these sentences through the GPT model and then get the hidden states.
Here you see the sizes.
It's 162.
That corresponds to 54 sentences times three groups, eight tokens per sentence, including padding
tokens.
And the medium version of GPT two has 1024 embeddings dimensions.
So that's the raw embeddings dimensionality.
And what we are going to do next is create a data set of just the target tokens and then apply a PCA
to those data.
Now I'm going to do the state space trajectories in one common projected space for all of the vectors
that all of the layers in this model.
And that means that I'm going to need to run a PCA on all of the data from all of the layers to define
one common principal components space.
And so to do that, I need to extract the token embeddings vectors for all of the target tokens and
all of the sentences and across all of the layers.
So this is just for one of the layers.
And that's what you see happening in this piece of code.
This screenshot here is actually inside of a double for loop.
Of course you will see the full code in a moment when I switch to Python, but basically I'm looping
over the sentences, identifying the index of the target word in each sentence, and then looping over
all of the transformer block or the hidden layer block layers.
So here I'm creating two matrices of data.
This matrix here called all x all activations.
And you can see the size of this is 4050 by 1024.
Now the 4050 corresponds to all of the sentences over all of the layers.
But for the subsequent analyses, we need to know which rows come from, which sentences with which
targets.
And so, uh, and also which layers.
So that's why I also created this lookup table over here, which tells me for each of these rows, what
is the sentence number.
So the sentence index which layer this row comes from, and the target, which is either zero or 1 or
2 corresponding to him or her or round.
And actually, truth be told, I don't actually need this first piece of information.
I didn't end up using these sentence index.
I left it in here anyway.
Initially I thought I would use it, but then I just decided to leave it in the code anyway, the point
is that we can use this lookup table to find which rows in this all acts matrix correspond to, for
example, layer six and the target token for her.
Okay, so then I will perform a PCA on these data.
So the all x matrix.
And that will give me a common set of reduced dimensional basis vectors that are based on all the data
from all of the texts, all the target tokens and all of the layers and so on.
And here you see a screenshot of the PCA explained variance, uh, converted into percent of the total
variance.
Now the first component explains almost two thirds of the variance of the data set.
And then the next couple of components accounts for looks like around 10%.
And I don't know, maybe 8 or 9%.
And actually when I look at these data, when I look at this screenshot, I think that it would be appropriate
to consider the state space trajectories in three dimensions.
So projecting the data down to these top three components.
However, for simplicity and visualize ability I'm actually just going to take the top two components.
Uh, just for make things a little bit easier.
But you know, if you were doing this kind of analysis for a real research project, then you would
want to consider taking the first three dimensions anyway.
So the last thing that I will show you in this code demo is plotting the state space trajectories and
calculating distances between the different trajectories.
So let me first describe this plot.
Here on the left we have the three target types.
And so there are three lines with three colors here in this plot.
Each marker corresponds to a different layer of the hidden states starting from all the way over here.
Weather basically all the same.
And you can see as we go deeper into the model, the trajectories get further out, so the spacing between
layers gets longer.
And there are also some differences between within the pronouns and between the pronouns and the word
round.
I don't know how well you can see this initial plot over here.
It's right here where my mouse is pointing.
But this dot here corresponds to the initial embeddings layer.
And the rest of these points are for the transformer blocks.
And then this wild, crazy set of points all the way down here is for the final transformer block.
But what are we even looking at here.
What is this graph.
Well, the x axis is the first principal component and the y axis is the second principal component.
So what I'm plotting here is the projection of the average vector from each layer and each of these
target types onto the first principal components.
It's really that simple.
It's just the projection onto the two axes with each transformer block or depth in the model plotted
as a line, or this set of points here.
And by the way, each of these individual points is actually the average of 54 sentences.
So in theory it would be possible to draw like some error sphere or confidence interval bubble around
each of these points, corresponding to the variability of these projections across the 54 sentences
within each layer and each target token type.
But that's just a general comment.
I'm not actually going to do that in this video.
Okay.
So you can see that the three sets of dots for the three target tokens generally carve out a similar
trajectory in this space, but certainly not exactly the same.
So then we can quantify that by calculating the distance between two different points from the same
layer for the two different or for a pair of target tokens.
And that you can see here.
So what you see here is literally just the Euclidean distance for example between these two target tokens.
So these two coordinates for this particular layer that would correspond to this data point over here.
So this like red purple line this is the distance between him and her in each layer.
And the green line is the distance between the vector for round and the average of the two vectors for
him and her.
That's why I call it him her in the figure legend here.
So this is literally just the average of the blue and the red lines over here.
And their collective distance from the green line.
So it's interesting to see that the target distances generally increase as we go deeper into the model.
But there are also some non-monotonic dynamics in here.
It would be interesting to explore how much of this difference here for the green line, for round versus
the pronouns is actually due to the fact that this is a grammatical error.
And maybe that grammatical error is causing the model some confusion, and maybe that requires some
extra processing, some additional rotations in the token embeddings vector, and so on.
Anyway, let's now switch to code and see how this analysis is implemented.
These are all libraries you've seen before, including this PCA function from scikit learn.
Here I'm importing GPT two medium and switching the model to eval mode.
So we have same vocab as for all the GPT two variants, and an embeddings dimension of 1024 and 24 layers
in the 24 transformer blocks.
Okay, so here is the data.
Uh, you can see these sentences all contain him.
These ones all contain her.
And these ones all contain the word round, because why not?
Uh, and also, by the way.
So I have some spaces in between these lines here, but it's actually just one list.
So, uh, after going through a couple of different variants, I decided that it would be easiest to
organize all of the data into one list, rather than having three separate lists for the three variable
types or the three target types.
And then over here I create this vector called sentence IDs, and I can show you what that looks like.
It's literally just a bunch of zeros, a bunch of ones and a bunch of twos.
And this just tells me which sentences contain which target tokens.
All right.
So and now here.
Yeah tokenizing each of the target words.
So I will be able to identify them later on.
And then I'm just tokenizing the rest of this text.
You've seen this before.
We need padding equals true.
We need to define a Pad token.
And then that's how we make sure that we have an equal number of tokens in every row in the batch that
we feed into the model.
And that's what I do here also because we need to pad, then we also need this attention mask here.
So therefore I'm using just the tokenizer and not what I often do is write tokenizer dot encode.
If you do this it's only going to return the input ids.
But if you leave out that particular method and you just call the entire object, then you will get
a lot more information.
This is all review by the way.
So just a bit of a repeat.
So you get the input IDs and the attention mask.
You can see this goes to zeros here.
And that yeah the model internally will know to just ignore those uh those tokens okay.
So here I push the model uh push the data through the model.
Uh, defining some variable here for the number of layers, and then just confirming the size of the
outputs.
So the hidden states for just one randomly selected layer here.
The next part of this code cell is to create the data set that we will use to define the principal components
axes.
Now, the reason why we need all of the data together from all of the layers is that if you would run
the PCA separately on each layer, then the coordinates, the basis vectors would actually be different
for every layer.
Now sometimes that might be appropriate.
Maybe that's what you want to do.
But in this case, to get this state space trajectory, we need to project all of the data from all
of the layers and all the target types onto a common set of axes.
If every layer has its own axis, then we cannot compare them.
We can't project them all onto the same lower dimensional space.
So that's why I need to create this new matrix where I'm basically just concatenating all of the target
token vectors from all of the hidden states layers.
So what is the size of that matrix?
Well, it's going to be layers by sentences.
And of course the second dimension is going to be the embeddings dimensionality.
And then the idea is that we want to run the PCA over this dimension over here.
So we are not going to reduce these data.
We are going to reduce the data along this axis along this dimension.
Okay.
And then yeah here is the lookup table.
So now I'm looping over all of the sentences here I'm finding which index in the sentence contains a
target.
There are three possible targets here.
So it can be either the token for him or the token for her, or the token for round.
Okay.
And yeah, these are constructed so that only one of these conditionals will be true for any sentence.
So if you do not have a data set that's so cleanly curated and crafted for this purpose, then yeah,
this might require some additional modifications.
Furthermore, if you've constructed the data set in such a way that you know exactly where the target
is, maybe the target token is in exactly the same position in every sequence, then you probably don't
need this loop at all.
If you know that it's you know, the target always appears in position six, for example.
Okay, but you've seen this before.
Okay.
And now here I'm looping over all of the layers.
Here I am grabbing the hidden states, uh, activations from this layer.
From this sentence, from this target index, and then I'm converting it into numpy and then squishing
out these singleton dimensions.
And you've seen this before.
Sometimes it's a matter of personal preference.
If you want to do these analyses in numpy format or PyTorch tensor format, it will often save you a
few headaches if you convert the data into numpy when you no longer need to work with PyTorch.
Okay, so that is for the activations.
And then for the lookup table.
Yeah.
As I've mentioned, this is really just allowing us to identify the label, the informant like meta
information about each row in this data matrix.
And also as I mentioned, this is really yeah, I don't actually use this in the analysis.
Okay.
So all of that is very fast to run.
And here I'm just confirming the sizes.
So 4050 rows and the data corresponds to the embeddings dimensionality.
Okay.
And by the way if you're curious, you know we can just have a look at this.
You can see this is just a bunch of indices.
Again this first column we're not going to use this middle column here tells us which layer each of
these rows corresponds to.
And this third column here indicates the target type.
Whether it's him or her corresponds to number one or round.
Okay.
Very good.
So now we are ready for a PCA.
Now the thing is, for the analysis, I already know a priori I have decided that I only want two components.
I just want to fit the data down to two components.
But I also want to examine the scree plot.
And so a scree plot with only two data points is not so interesting.
So here I'm actually running the PCA, and I'm not going to use these data for any of the subsequent
analyses.
I'm just running this here to get the scree plot so I can get the explained variance ratio.
That is the, uh, that's actually the proportion of variance.
I multiply it by 100 to get percent.
Okay.
And then actually I'm curious what these actual numbers are.
So let's see.
Just going to print this out here.
So this top component accounts for 62% of the variance.
And then we have a little over 10% of the variance and 7.5% of the variance.
So that means that these three components together account for around 80% of the variance.
And that is, you know, I mean, it's more than half of the variance.
But that also means that 20% of the variance is in these later components.
Each one of these components individually is relatively Small, they account for 1% or a fraction of
a percent of variance.
But there are so many of these, there's 1024 of these.
And so altogether they account for a lot of variability.
And this is an important consideration and an important potential limitation of these kinds of analyses,
where you project down to a small number of dimensions.
So on the one hand, it is true that we are going to capture around 73% of the variance.
But on the other hand, that means that there is 27% of the variance that we are completely ignoring.
And maybe there's really important stuff happening in the other third of the variance in the data anyway.
Okay, enough of that.
Uh.
Let's see.
All right.
So the next thing is to rerun the PCA with just two components.
And now here I'm just projecting down.
So I'm using PCA dot transform.
This projects the data down to however many components I have identified here.
By the way, you can actually still, you know, get this projection from this analysis here.
PCA is a linear decomposition.
So you could actually project down to all 20 components from this analysis here, and then just disregard
the other 18 and only store the top two.
But I was just a bit lazy.
So I reran the analysis here because it's quite fast to do anyway.
Okay, so uh, yeah, let's see here I'm showing the sizes.
This is the all axis you've seen before, and now I'm just confirming that the projection down to 2D
is 4050 by two.
That is an important confirmation to check because for example, let's say uh, you have the data organize
the other way.
So now it's kind of arbitrary, you know, you can have the data.
Let me do it like this.
So in theory, it's sort of arbitrary.
It doesn't matter which way you organize the data, but it does matter for the PCA that the data are
flipped in the correct orientation.
So this would be wrong.
What we are doing here is projecting down all of the sentences and layers to two dimensions, and preserving
all of the embeddings dimensions.
That's wrong.
That's the opposite of what we want.
We want to project down the features, the activations along the dimensions.
So that should be sentences or data observations by features over here.
Okay.
So here is where I do the trajectories analysis.
So let's go through this.
So proj 2D.
So I'll leave this here so you can see the shape.
And also the actually let me include in here the lookup table.
Dot shape.
Okay.
So you can also see the shapes of all of these matrices that I'm working with here.
So from this proj 2d what I want to get here is all of the rows that are from layer zero and target
token zero.
So the sentences that contain the word him.
So how do I find all of the rows in here that are from layer zero and that were from the sentence with
him.
And then this is the projection onto the first and second principal component.
So that is what all of this code does here.
So I have this for loop over all of the layers.
So the model layers plus one of course plus one is for the initial embeddings.
So where does a lookup table one.
So the second column where does that correspond to zero.
And the third column where does that correspond to?
Also zero.
That's for him.
Okay.
And once I've identified all of these.
Now let me extract that.
And I need I'll just code that to be zero.
So that is 54 by 254 sentences from layer zero.
And the projection onto the first and the second principal components.
Okay.
So then I have mean x is zero.
And that is to average over all of the 54 sentences.
Okay great.
So I hope that makes sense.
It's a little bit intimidating when you see this code the first time, but I hope I've explained it
sufficiently well.
So three lines of code here.
They're all nearly identical except for this identifier over here.
And that allows us to find the three different tokens.
If you prefer.
You could also put this in a for loop as well.
So you could say for, you know, target uh, target I in in range three or something like this, but,
uh, it doesn't matter.
Okay.
So uh, that is for, uh, the average trajectories that's going to give us those curvy plots.
And now here I am averaging together the pronouns.
So, uh, yes, averaging together him and her, extracting the data for round.
And here I'm calculating the Euclidean distance.
So it's the difference between the vectors and then squared.
And then I sum over all of those.
And then I take the square root of that.
So this is the Euclidean distance.
This is for uh him versus her.
And this is for the pronouns versus the uh sorry.
No, I said that backwards.
This is for the pronouns versus the adjective.
And this is the difference between the two pronouns here.
So I'm just taking numpy dot diff for the first two elements of the last dimension, and that corresponds
to him versus her over here.
Okay, so quite a bit going on in this code cell.
But I hope it all makes sense.
You're going to use code that looks a lot like this in the code challenge in a couple of videos from
now.
Okay.
So now we are ready for some visualization.
So for the first plot, actually let me show you this plot here.
So this is the plot that you have seen in the slides a moment ago.
So to create this first plot, it's very straightforward.
We just want to plot over all of the layers, the projection onto the first principal component for
the x coordinates, and the projection onto the second principal components for the y axis coordinates.
And that's what you see here.
So this is for round.
And we have the average trajectories.
The the first dimension here is for the layers.
This is for the first principal component.
This is for the second principal component.
And the two corresponds to the target round.
So the third condition.
Okay so I have two lines of code here for the plotting.
And that's basically just because I want it to have a line and a scatter plot.
So here you see only a scatter plot with no line.
And yeah, I thought it would look nicer to have both a line and a scatter plot.
One of the biggest challenges in explaining and understanding how deep learning models work is that
the high dimensionality prevents us from being able to easily visualize the internal calculations and
representations, and that is one of the reasons why simple regression models with only a handful of
parameters are much easier to understand and to explain, and so projecting these thousand dimensional
vectors down to 2 or 3 dimensions can be pretty useful for visualization and intuition.
On the other hand, as I explained, we are also ignoring a ton of information, and even though all
of those other dimensions explain individually very little total variability, they might still contain
a lot of important and relevant information.
So there is also a big risk of overinterpreting dimension reduced dynamics.
In particular, with regards to PCA, the components are defined by variance, which means that PCA
assumes that variance equals relevance.
Now that is not necessarily the case.
It's not necessarily true that dimensions that contain a lot of variability are the most important for
the model to process a given token.
So it could also be interesting to explore trajectories with other dimension reduction techniques,
although really any compression method will suffer from similar limitations as PCA does in terms of
highlighting only a few dimensions out of a very large number.
Nonetheless, these kinds of analyses are great.
They can be insightful starting points to continue with more in-depth investigations.
For example, like what is causing those little bumps in the distances between the pronouns and the
adjective in the dataset that I just showed you.
So in the next video, I will show you how to use a Python library to identify parts of speech of tokens.
And then in the video after that, that's going to be a code challenge.
We will come back to creating and quantifying state space trajectories in real text data.